<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Release Notes</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <h1>Release Notes</h1>

    <h2>Version 4.0.5 (2014-03-11)</h2>
    <p>This maintenance release includes the following changes:</p>
    <ul>
      <li>[web] Fix CITE-937: Service proxy is bypassed.</li>
      <li>[web] Reintroduce default site content (/site).</li>
      <li>Update <em>Getting Started Guide</em></li>
    </ul>

    <h2>Version 4.0.4 (2014-03-07)</h2>
    <p>This update includes the following fix:</p>
    <ul>
      <li>[web] Fixed CITE-924: EPSG database is not created in web app environment.</li>
    </ul>

    <h2>Version 4.0.3 (2013-11-14)</h2>
    <p>This maintenance release includes the following changes:</p>
    <ul>
      <li>[web] Fixed CITE-895 (Remove site-specific HTML resources from WAR file)</li>
    </ul>

    <h2>Version 4.0.2 (2013-11-01)</h2>
    <p>This maintenance release includes the following changes:</p>
    <ul>
      <li>[web] Fixed base URL for web resources.</li>
      <li>[spi] Don't split class and package names in TestNG reports.</li>
      <li>[web] Added 'ogc.cite' profile to POM.</li>
      <li>Updated dependencies to latest release versions: Xerces 2.11.0, TestNG 6.8.7, 
      Maven plugins, etc.</li>
    </ul>

    <h2>Version 4.0.1 (2013-08-23)</h2>
    <p>This is a maintenance release. It includes the following updates:</p>
    <ul>
      <li>[spi] Show TestNG verdicts for each test group in text summary.</li>
      <li>[web] Display sessions sorted in order with name of test suite.</li>
      <li>Updated documentation.</li>
    </ul>

    <h2>Version 4.0 (2013-07-04)</h2>
    <p>This is the final release of TEAM-Engine 4.0. The following issues were resolved:</p>
    <ul>
      <li>[core] Fixed CITE-822 (SoapParser does not support HTTP code 400 "Bad request").</li>
      <li>[core] Fixed CITE-821 (HTTPParser attempts to parse non-XML entity).</li>
      <li>[core] Fixed CITE-810 (eliminate spurious inherited failures).</li>
    </ul>

    <h2>Version 4.0-rc</h2>
    <ul>
      <li>Release candidate.</li>
      <li>[core] Warning verdict in subtest no longer 'taints' result of parent test.</li>
      <li>[web] Uploaded file is placed in test session directory (fix for CITE-808).</li>
      <li>[web] Removed config/home property in TE_BASE/config.xml.</li>
      <li>[web] GetStatus polling interval increased to 4s from 1s.</li>
    </ul>

    <h2>Version 4.0-beta3</h2>
    <ul>
      <li>TestNG reporter (BasicXMLReporter) adds test result attributes to report.</li>
      <li>Added teamengine-console module (assembles binary CLI distribution instead of core module).</li>
      <li>TECore.build_request() no longer automatically percent-encodes request parameters.</li>
      <li>CTL test report generator now recognizes all test verdicts.</li>
      <li>Updated teamengine-core dependencies (joda-time-2.2).</li>
      <li>Updated site documentation.</li>
    </ul>

    <h2>Version 4.0-beta2</h2>
    <ul>
      <li>Allow customization of content on welcome page (teamengine-web module)</li>
      <li>Added test suite revision/status element ("Alpha","Beta","Final","Deprecated").</li>
      <li>Eliminated separate contexts for static web resources.</li>
      <li>Added TE_BASE/config.xml as a watched resource (update triggers reload).</li>
      <li>REST API presents Javadoc overview document at /rest/suites/{etsCode}/{etsVersion}/.</li>
      <li>Added support for ctl-msg processing instruction on ctl:test tags to enable output 
      of structured messages (via saxon:serialize() function).</li>
      <li>Various updates of the site documentation.</li>
    </ul>
  </body>
</html>
