<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Release Notes</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <h1>Release Notes</h1>
    <h2>Version 4.0-rc</h2>
    <ul>
      <li>Release candidate.</li>
      <li>[core] Warning verdict in subtest no longer 'taints' result of parent test.</li>
      <li>[web] Uploaded file is placed in test session directory (fix for CITE-808).</li>
      <li>[web] Removed config/home property in TE_BASE/config.xml.</li>
      <li>[web] GetStatus polling interval increased to 4s from 1s.</li>
    </ul>

    <h2>Version 4.0-beta3</h2>
    <ul>
      <li>TestNG reporter (BasicXMLReporter) adds test result attributes to report.</li>
      <li>Added teamengine-console module (assembles binary CLI distribution instead of core module).</li>
      <li>TECore.build_request() no longer automatically percent-encodes request parameters.</li>
      <li>CTL test report generator now recognizes all test verdicts.</li>
      <li>Updated teamengine-core dependencies (joda-time-2.2).</li>
      <li>Updated site documentation.</li>
    </ul>

    <h2>Version 4.0-beta2</h2>
    <ul>
      <li>Allow customization of content on welcome page (teamengine-web module)</li>
      <li>Added test suite revision/status element ("Alpha","Beta","Final","Deprecated").</li>
      <li>Eliminated separate contexts for static web resources.</li>
      <li>Added TE_BASE/config.xml as a watched resource (update triggers reload).</li>
      <li>REST API presents Javadoc overview document at /rest/suites/{etsCode}/{etsVersion}/.</li>
      <li>Added support for ctl-msg processing instruction on ctl:test tags to enable output 
      of structured messages (via saxon:serialize() function).</li>
      <li>Various updates of the site documentation.</li>
    </ul>
  </body>
</html>
